---
tags: dyre, configuration
---

# Announcing Dyre 0.9 release candidate

[Dyre][dyre-hackage] is a tool for Haskell program configuration by
(re)compilation.  The last release was 0.8.12, way back in 2014.
Since then, the project has been dormant… until now.  I am pleased
to announce a [Dyre 0.9 release candidate][rc].  In this post I
outline what's changed and put out a call for testing ahead of the
official release.

[dyre-hackage]: https://hackage.haskell.org/package/dyre
[rc]: https://hackage.haskell.org/package/dyre-0.9.0/candidate


## Dyre overview

Dyre implements program configuration in the style of
[*xmonad*][xmonad].  Configurations are Haskell programs using
native types and functions.  When a Dyre-enabled program starts up,
it detects whether the configuration has changed.  If so, it
(re)compiles and caches a custom executable.  Then it executes the
custom executable and enters the "main program".

[xmonad]: https://xmonad.org/

Being able to configure a program using data types that are "native"
to the program is both pleasant and powerful.  Subtle user
configuration errors that may go unnoticed, or lie dormant until
they crash your program, instead become type errors.  The program
author has much less verification to perform compared to a
configuration written in text formats such as YAML or JSON.

This post is not intended to be a Dyre tutorial.  Refer to the
[`Config.Dyre`][Config.Dyre] module documentation to see what Dyre
looks like in practice.

[Config.Dyre]: https://hackage.haskell.org/package/dyre/docs/Config-Dyre.html


## Becoming Dyre's maintainer

[Will Donnelly][wgd] is Dyre's original author and maintainer.
Credit and thanks to him for writing a very useful tool and actively
maintaining it over several years.

[wgd]: http://www.willdonnelly.net/

The most recent release of [Dyre on Hackage][dyre-hackage] was
0.8.12 in 2014.  There was activity on [GitHub][dyre-github] after
that release, until early 2017.  After that, Dyre was dormant.

[dyre-github]: https://github.com/willdonnelly/dyre

Meanwhile my major project [Purebred][] uses Dyre for configuration.
We encountered some dependency issues and behaviour in Dyre that
caused problems with newer versions of GHC.  We also noticed some
things that could be improved.

[Purebred]: https://github.com/purebred-mua/purebred

I decided to offer to take maintainership of Dyre.  I emailed Will
Donnelly but did not receive a response.  Following the [*Taking
over a package*][takeover-guide] guide, I emailed the *Haskell-cafe*
mailing list to [announce my intent][takeover-mail] to take over the
package.  This email *did* get noticed.  Will graciously agreed that
I should assume maintainership.  He added me as a maintainer on
Hackage and a collaborator on GitHub.

[takeover-guide]: https://wiki.haskell.org/Taking_over_a_package
[takeover-mail]: https://mail.haskell.org/pipermail/haskell-cafe/2019-April/130923.html

I put my shiny new commit bit to use and soon pushed several changes
to GitHub, before… *not* cutting a release, then doing nothing for
another two years.  But now—at last—I am putting the finishing
touches on a new release for Dyre.  So…


## What's changed in version 0.9?

Major changes since 0.8.12 include:

- `realMain` can now **return arbitrary types**.  To support this
  change, `Params` got a new type variable.

  ```haskell
  -- before
  data Params cfgType
  wrapMain :: Params cfgType -> cfgType -> IO ()

  -- after
  data Params cfgType a
  wrapMain :: Params cfgType a -> cfgType -> IO a
  ```

- `defaultParams`, which contains `undefined` fields, has been
  **deprecated** in favour of the new function `newParams`:

  ```haskell
  -- here be bottoms
  defaultParams :: Params cfg a

  -- celestial music playing
  newParams
    :: String                 -- ^ 'projectName'
    -> (cfg -> IO a)          -- ^ 'realMain' function
    -> (cfg -> String -> cfg) -- ^ 'showError' function
    -> Params cfg a
  ```

  `newParams` takes values for the three required fields, so program
  authors can clearly see what they have to do and are less likely
  to make a mistake.

- **Cabal store support**: Users can add extra include dirs via the
  `includeDirs` field of `Params`.  The program author just has to
  put the package's library directory in the new `includeDirs`
  field:

  ```haskell
  import Config.Dyre
  import Paths_myapp (getLibDir)

  realMain  = …
  showError = …

  myapp cfg = do
    libdir <- getLibDir
    let params = (newParams "myapp" realMain showError)
          { includeDirs = [libdir] }
    wrapMain params cfg
  ```

  If an include dir appears to be in a Cabal store and matches the
  `projectName`, Dyre adds the corresponding `-package-id` option.
  As a result, recompilation works for programs installed via `cabal
  install`.

- **Stack support**: if Dyre detects a `stack.yaml` alongside the
  custom configuration, it will use Stack to compile the program.
  Credit to *Jaro Reinders* for this feature.

- Dyre compiles the custom executable with **`-threaded`** when the
  main executable uses the threaded RTS.  This means one less thing
  for program authors to remember (or forget) to do.

- Dyre now **requires GHC >= 7.10**.

- Improved **documentation**.

- The **test suite** was expanded, and can now be executed via
  `cabal test`.

- Dyre **cleans up** better after compilation (successful or
  unsuccesful), and behaves better when the custom configuration is
  removed.

- Some versions of GHC write to standard error, even during a
  successful compilation.  Dyre no longer treats this as a
  compilation failure, instead relying solely on GHC's exit status.

- Dyre recognises the **`HC` environment variable**.  If set, it
  will compile the program using the specified compiler.

- Fixes for **Windows**, including working with recent versions of
  the *process* package.

Additionally, I set up **continuous integration** for the Dyre
codebase.  Initially it used Travis-CI but I recently migrated to
GitHub Actions.  It includes jobs for testing Dyre on MacOS and
Windows.


## Call for testing

I would like testing and feedback on the [release candidate][rc]
before I cut the final release of Dyre 0.9.  In particular, I would
welcome more testing on **Windows**, as well as the **Stack**
support.  I also need to test with GHC 7.10, which for technical
reasons is not covered by the CI matrix.

**You can help** by testing Dyre in *any* environments, but
especially those ones.  Even if you only run `cabal test`, or
implement the example from the [`Config.Dyre`][Config.Dyre] module
documentation, it will help.  Please report testing outcomes in the
[testing checklist][] issue.  Failures *and successes* should be
reported there.

[testing checklist]: https://github.com/willdonnelly/dyre/issues/39

For testing on Windows, you can install the `cabal` and `ghc`
packages from [Chocolatey][].  To run the `cabal test` suite you'll
also need a POSIX shell installed as `sh.exe`.  The one provided by
the `gitsh` package worked for me.

[Chocolatey]: https://chocolatey.org/

I hope to make the final release in a couple of weeks.


## Future work

One area I have identified for future development is recording file
hashes to detect changes.  This is important to support the **Nix**
packaging system, which sets all files' creation and modification
times to the epoch.  It will also help with **downgrades**, where
the main executable's modification time decreases.

This known gap is the reason I didn't release a new version in the
almost two years since I became the maintainer.  I kept thinking,
*"I should really fix that first"*.  But I still haven't implemented
file hashing, and don't have immediate plans to.  So I decided not
to delay any longer the release of the improvements I *have* made.

If Nix support or other features are particularly important to you,
please consider contributing to Dyre.  You can create issues and
pull requests [on GitHub][dyre-github], or reach out to me directly.
